## Introduction {.page_break_before}

Angiogenesis is a physiological process essential for skeletal development and growth, for bone healing and regeneration; the established vascularization is crucial for successful bone formation and repair (Wernike et al., 2010, Roche et al., 2012, Carulli et al., 2013, Filipowska et al., 2017, Ren et al., 2022).
Besides carrying nutrients and growth factors, the newly formed vessels are a delivery route of the stem cells and progenitors to the defect site (Kuttappan et al., 2018, Kurobane et al., 2019, Grosso et al., 2017).
Moreover, age-related osteoporosis was shown to diminish with improved vascularization (Grunewald et al., 2021).
There are many research areas which could benefit from an improved three-dimensional (3D) imaging of the vasculature within bone tissue: bone metastatic disease, bone biology, tissue engineering, implantology, reconstructive surgery and healing of both small and critical size bone defects with or without bone grafts.
Most synthetic bone grafts fail to bridge critical sized defects due to their inability to promote vascularization (Lovett et al., 2009, Ren et al., 2022).
Proper simultaneous non-destructive 3D imaging of the vasculature within bone tissue and of the bone tissue itself, especially in case of large bone grafts, has been a challenge for decades (Mercado-Pagan et al., 2015, Ren et al., 2022).
The structural nature of skeletal tissue makes direct 3D imaging of its vasculature extremely difficult letting histology, a destructive and two-dimensional approach, remain a gold standard for years (Nunez et al., 2017).
As blood vessels are encased in the calcified tissue, classic soft tissue imaging techniques such as light sheet microscopy or confocal laser scanning microscopy are challenging to apply (Nunez et al., 2017).
Although, some promising advancements on tissue clearing-based imaging in case of craniofacial bones in mouse model have been recently published (Rindone et al., 2021, Luo et al., 2019).

In the last decades, X-ray micro-computed tomography (microCT) gained recognition as a non-destructive 3D imaging technique for bone morphology (Harrison and Cooper, 2015).
For absorption-based X-ray microCT, the distinguishing vessels from other soft tissue structures within the bone structures is inhibited by the lack of noticeable differences in their respective X-ray absorption levels.
It is thus necessary to use castings or instillation of contrast agents to unambiguously detect the vasculature.
The available vascular replica-based imaging protocols improved the imaging of the vasculature within the bone, but had some serious drawbacks, such as disjoint vascular components and/or missing vascular segments (Schneider et al., 2009, Nunez et al., 2017).
Another reported drawback issue was the limited contrast between the perfusion agent and mineralized tissue, which made their distinct segmentation problematic.
To solve this issue, samples were usually decalcified prior to vascular imaging.
The decalcification procedure makes simultaneous assessment of the intracortical bone microstructure and the vascular morphology impossible (Nunez et al., 2017).

Intravascular contrast-agent-enhanced microCT has the potential to overcome this obstacle.
It has been applied and gained popularity as the method of choice for the evaluation of angiogenesis in bone tissue engineering and remodeling applications (Young et al., 2008, Roche et al., 2012, Ren et al., 2022).
Barium sulfate and Microfil have been applied as the two most common contrast agents in studies about the vascularization of the bone tissue.
Barium sulfate has been shown to provide a better perfusion and, correspondingly, visualization only in some selected studies (Roche et al., 2012).
In many other studies, barium sulfate suspensions have been reported to have disadvantages such as higher viscosity, sometimes leading to incomplete vascular filling and weak or inhomogeneous signal especially in higher resolution scans, due to particle aggregation (Krucker et al., 2006, Perrien et al., 2016, Leyssens et al., 2021).
Although applied in probably a larger number of studies, Microfil was also reported to have many disadvantages, including poor and/or incomplete filling of the vasculature (Perrien et al., 2016, Hong et al., 2020, Roche et al., 2012, Leyssens et al., 2021).

The problem of contrasting becomes even further compounded in the presence of a metal implant.
Such implants have revolutionized the treatment of patients with missing teeth or injured joints and bones (Yi et al., 2019, Raphel et al., 2016).
The success of implant placement is believed to depend largely onto the interactions occurring near or at the implant-tissue interface (Yi et al., 2019, Bai et al., 2018).
MicroCT is the only available approach to non-destructively investigate an intact bone-implant interface in 3D (Yi et al., 2019).
Beyond the study of the anatomy and physiology of angiogenesis and vasculature of the bone organ, the contribution of the vascular component in the healing process around bone-borne implants is also considered an area of study meriting further experimentation (Ren et al., 2022, Al Subaie et al., 2015).
To date, few studies have tried to visualize the vasculature surrounding implants using microCT imaging and, to the best of our knowledge, none have managed to resolve the micro-vascular component in a large animal model due to technical limitations of the perfused contrast agent and the applied microCT imaging technique.

With the present study we introduce the polymer-based contrast agent µAngiofil for microCT-based visualization of microvasculature within bone tissue in various small and large animal models, with and without decalcification of the bone.
Moreover, we show that µAngiofil is suitable for simultaneous imaging and subsequent analysis of peri-implant hard and soft tissues as well as their vascularization in the vicinity of metal implants in a large animal model.
