## Materials, Methods, and Results {.page_break_before}

### Animals

In this study, we used one 21-month-old transgenic VEGF male mouse (see @doi:10.1126/science.abc8479 for more details), five 10-week-old CB17SCID male mice, three 12-week-old C57BL/6 mice, one 60-week-old C57BL/6 mouse, and six female Göttingen minipigs.
Animal procedures were performed in accordance with the applicable Swedish, Israeli, or Swiss legislation on the protection of animals and were approved by the corresponding committees.

Murine experiments were approved by the local Swiss ethical committee (Tierversuchskommission des Kantons Bern, Amt für Veterinärwesen, Bern, Switzerland) under permit number BE 55/16.
Minipig experiments were approved by the Malmö/Lund Ethics Committee on Animal Testing at the Lund District Court, Sweden under license 5.8.18-15672/2019.

Animal model, strain, age, animal number and sex are collected in a table available in the [Supplementary Materials].

The following reporting adheres to the ARRIVE Guidelines 2.0 [@doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.3000411] for relevant items.

### Tomographic imaging

For this study, we imaged all samples with different Bruker SkyScan X-ray microcomputed tomography scanners.
An overview of the imaging and reconstruction parameters is given in the text below.
Imaging parameters are mentioned briefly below and summarized in detail in a table given in the [Supplementary Materials].

### Contrast agent μAngiofil
For all the applications mentioned below, we instilled the vasculature of the model animals with the iodine-based contrast agent μAngiofil (Fumedica AG, Switzerland).

The contrast agent was prepared according to the manufacturer's recommendations.
Briefly, in a preparation step two out of three components (labelled 'Contrast Solution' (blue) and 'PU') are mixed together.
During instillation, these components are again mixed with a hardener in a mixing tube.
The instillation into the cannulated animal vascular system is ideally performed with a syringe pump, taking care of a reproducible instillation speed.

The perfusion of the animals was performed as previously described [@doi:10.1007/s00429-020-02158-8; @doi:10.1152/ajprenal.00099.2017].
Briefly, heparinized animals were deeply anesthetized (details for each animal model are given below).
Here is a brief description of the perfusion procedure, as performed in mice: The thorax and the peritoneal cavity were opened with scissors to expose the descending aorta.
The exposed aorta was then cannulated in either antegrade (for the perfusion of the hind limbs) or retrograde direction (for the perfusion of the head and teeth) with a Venflon cannula (26 GA).
Afterward, the blood was flushed out with a warm PBS solution.
Several cuts of the liver edge allowed for drainage of the blood and buffer solution.

Thereafter, the selected part of the body (hind limbs or head and teeth) was perfused with μAngiofil at 1--1.5 ml/min using a syringe pump.
The perfusion lasted until the organ of interest appeared completely filled with the blue contrast agent [@doi:10.1016/j.vph.2018.09.003; @doi:10.1152/ajprenal.00099.2017].
In bones, it is not possible to visually monitor this color change, thus perfusion of the neighboring soft tissues serves as an indirect marker of sufficient perfusion within the bone.
To achieve correct perfusion of the vessels within the bone, we prolonged the perfusion time by instilling at least 2 ml of extra volume of contrast agent after all the superficial tissues of the extremity or head turned blue.

#### Contrast-enhanced microAngioCT of mice using μAngiofil

Here, one 21-month-old VEGF transgenic male mouse was anesthetized with a mixture of fentanyl (0.05 mg/kg), midazolam (5 mg/kg), and medetomidine (0.5 mg/kg).
μAngiofil perfusion was performed as described above.
After μAngiofil polymerization, samples were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde (PFA) solution at 4 °C and stored in PFA until tomographic imaging.
Samples were then imaged using a SkyScan 1172 (Version F, control software version 1.5 (build 26), Bruker microCT N.V., Kontich, Belgium).
For imaging, the samples were removed from the PFA solution, wrapped in closed-pore foam, and scanned in a custom-made sealed plastic sample holder under humid conditions.
Imaging parameters included an acceleration voltage of 49 kV, a current of 200 μA, and an isotropic voxel size of 2.99 μm.
Projection images were recorded over a sample rotation of 360°, acquiring one projection every 0.05°, with 3 projections averaged for noise reduction.
Each projection image with a size of 4000 x 2672 pixels had an exposure time of 985 ms.

Figure @fig:1 shows the bone microstructure and vascularization of a tibia of a 21-month-old VEGF transgenic male mouse.
This visualization approach enables the simultaneous display of bone and its vascularization.
These tomographic datasets were also used in another study [@doi:10.1126/science.abc8479], where we performed simultaneous quantification of vasculature and bone volume.

![**microAngioCT of the proximal murine tibia of a 21-month-old VEGF transgenic male mouse.**
  After perfusion with μAngiofil, the murine tibia was harvested, fixated in 4 % PFA and imaged by microCT.
  Arrowheads mark microvessels within the tibia.
  The diameter of the tibia shaft is around 1 mm.
  On the right side of the image, one can distinguish the bigger epiphyseal vessels.
  The bone tissue appears white at the plane of the virtual section through the microCT-dataset.](images/Fig1_murine_tibia.png){#fig:1}

#### Decalcification of the μAngiofil-perfused murine tibia

We successfully established a bone decalcifying protocol (for murine hind limb) with 10% ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid (EDTA) solution [@doi:10.1038/srep41842] by adapting previous work [@doi:10.1002/jemt.20720].

Decalcification of bone tissue does not negatively influence the bone structure itself, but reduces the X-ray absorption of bone tissue and thus makes it impossible to visualize it simultaneously with the vasculature (Fig. @fig:2 B).

As described above, we instilled the lower body of 10-week-old CB17SCID male mice with μAngiofil.
Following polymerization of the contrast agent, the hind limbs were collected, fixed in 4 % PFA, and stored in PFA until scanning.
After an initial tomographic scan, the hind limbs were decalcified in 10% EDTA (pH 7.5) at room temperature for 7 days, followed by a second tomographic scan of the sample.

These samples were imaged with a SkyScan 1172 (Version F, control software version 1.5 (build 23), Bruker microCT N.V., Kontich, Belgium).
Imaging parameters included an acceleration voltage of 59 kV, a current of 167 μA, and an isotropic voxel size of 3.19 μm.
Projection images were recorded over a sample rotation of 180°, acquiring one projection every 0.1°, with 2 projections averaged for noise reduction.
Each projection image with a size of 4000 x 2672 pixels had an exposure time of 1740 ms.

![**microAngioCT-based visualization of the diaphysis of CB17SCID mice tibia before (A & A') and after decalcification with 10% EDTA (B & B').**
  In A and A' the tibia bone appears brighter and opaque due to higher X-ray absorption.
  In B and B' the tibia bone appears transparent due to its lowered X-ray absorption after decalcification.
  Due to the decalcification, connecting vessels between the periosteal vessels and the vessels of the bone marrow cavity (bmc) are more easily detectable (blue arrows in A vs. B).
  The visualization of the vessels within the medullar cavity (*central sinus* (CS)) is also improved.
  At the external surface of the tibia, supplying arteries are visible (*arteria et vena nutricia* (avn)).
  The structure of the bone tissue is no longer clearly detectable after the decalcification (B-B’).](images/Fig2_Decalcification.png){#fig:2}

#### Bone metastatic disease model, microAngioCT

As mentioned in the introduction, simultaneous imaging of bone and vasculature is crucial in a bone metastatic disease model.
Since changes in bone and vasculature are believed to be of crucial importance for the progression of bone metastatic disease, decalcifying the bone tissue is highly unfavorable.

To verify the suitability of our microAngioCT approach for imaging intratumoral vasculature in native, non-decalcified bone tissue we used the following murine bone metastatic disease model.
50000 PC3-M-Pro4Luc2 dTomato cells were injected into the tibia of 6-week-old CB17SCID male mice as previously described [@doi:10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-18-1220; @doi:10.1038/bonekey.2016.4].
The X-ray assessment (25 kV, 6 sec, Faxitron Bioptics, Tucson, Arizona, US) was conducted on days 7, 14, 21, and 28 after implantation to monitor the progression of the lesions.
Before perfusion with μAngiofil (as described above), the hind limb of interest was X-rayed using Faxitron Bioptics as a standard follow-up in this model (see insert in Fig. @fig:3, Panel A).
The harvested and fixated murine hind limb (4 % PFA at 4 °C) was then imaged using a desktop microCT scanner (SkyScan 1272, control software 1.1.19, Bruker microCT N.V., Kontich, Belgium) (Fig. @fig:3).
Imaging parameters included an acceleration voltage of 60 kV, a current of 166 μA, and an isotropic voxel size of 1.65 μm.
Projection images were recorded over a sample rotation of 180°, acquiring one projection every 0.1°, with 3 projections averaged for noise reduction.
Each projection image with a size of 4904 x 3280 pixels had an exposure time of 2800 ms.

The visualization (CTvox (v.3.3.1), Bruker microCT N.V., Kontich, Belgium) displays intratumoral vasculature and extensive defects in mineralized bone tissue.
Neighboring structures, such as the growth plate and the epiphysis or the menisci are also easily assessed (Fig. @fig:3).

![**microAngioCT of a xenograft tumor implanted into tibia of 6-week-old CB17SCID male mice.**
  A: Maximum intensity projection (MIP) of the three-dimensional dataset of the investigated hind limb segment indicated in the inserted X-ray image of the mouse prior to harvesting.
  Inset: X-ray image before sample harvesting.
  B: Virtual section through the microAngioCT dataset visualizing remarkable defects represented as holes (asterisks in B and C) in the tibial bone at the tumor site (encircled).
  C: A more deeply positioned virtual section displaying the inner surface of the diseased tibia.
  Besides irregularly patterned tumor vessels (in B & C) further bony structures like the growth plate or calcified parts of the medial meniscus (MM) are clearly distinguishable.](images/Fig3_tumor_tibia.png){#fig:3}

#### Imaging of Murine Mandible and Teeth

C57BL/6 mice were anesthetized (with a mixture of fentanyl (0.05 mg/kg), midazolam (5 mg/kg), and medetomidine (0.5 mg/kg)), and their head was perfused with μAngiofil.
The perfused head was harvested and fixed (4 % PFA at 4 °C).
Before tomographic imaging the mandible was excised, wrapped in a paper towel, and scanned in a sealed pipette tip.

The mouse teeth were imaged using a desktop microCT scanner (SkyScan 1172 (Version F, control software version 1.5 (build 23)), Bruker microCT N.V., Kontich, Belgium) (Fig. @fig:4).
Imaging parameters included an acceleration voltage of 80 kV, a current of 124 μA, and an isotropic voxel size of 1 μm.
Projection images were recorded over a sample rotation of 360°, acquiring one projection every 0.1°, with 4 projections averaged for noise reduction.
Each projection image with a size of 4000 x 2672 pixels had an exposure time of 6260 ms.

The microvasculature of the murine mandible, periodontal ligament, and the teeth (even within their pulp chamber) can be clearly visualized without the need for decalcification (Fig. @fig:4).

![**microAngioCT of the vasculature of C57BL/6 mice teeth.**
  A: View onto a virtual section parallel to the crowns of the murine teeth: pulp chambers are visible, and the pulpal vessels are presented.
  The inset shows a full view of the tomographic dataset.
  B: Sagittal section through the mandible.
  The microvessels within the pulp cavities and root canals are distinguishable.
  C: Detailed view of the dentogingival plexus and periodontal ligament vessels (PLV).](images/Fig4_mouse_teeth.png){#fig:4}

#### microAngioCT of the mandible in a large animal model (Göttingen Minipig)

Göttingen minipigs (Ellegaard Göttingen Minipig, Dalmose, Denmark) were anesthetized intramuscularly (25--35 mg/kg, Dexdomitor; Orion Pharma Animal Health and 50--70 mg/kg, Zoletil 100 Vet, Virbac) and intravenously heparinized with 300 IE/kg (Heparin LEO, LEO Pharma).
After heparin infusion, the pigs were euthanized with an intravenous dose (100 mg/kg) of pentobarbital (Euthanimal vet, VM Pharma).
The external carotid artery was accessed by blunt dissection through the tissue of the ventral neck and cannulated (BD Venflon, 17G).
After washing out the blood with PBS, the corresponding head side was selectively perfused with μAngiofil through the arterial tree.
Otherwise, the perfusion was performed with the same approach as in the previously described mice experiments.
After the polymerization of μAngiofil, we excised the mandible and fixated and stored it in 4 % PFA solution at 4 °C.

Mandibles were then scanned with a SkyScan 1273 (control software version 1.1, Bruker microCT N.V., Kontich, Belgium) (Fig. @fig:5).
Imaging parameters included an acceleration voltage of 100 kV, a current of 80 μA, and an isotropic voxel size of 21 μm (panel A) of 9 μm (panels B and C).
For the visualization shown in panel A, we recorded projection images with a size of 3072 x 1944 pixels over a sample rotation of 360°, acquiring one projection every 0.1°, with 5 projections averaged for noise reduction.
Each projection image had an exposure time of 225 ms.
For the visualizations shown in panels B and C, the sample was rotated over 360° acquiring one projection every 0.15°, with 5 projections averaged for noise reduction.
In addition, two horizontally overlapping projections were stitched to one projection with a size of 4832 x 1944 px to increase the imaged sample volume.
Each projection image had an exposure time of 225 ms.

![**microAngioCT of the minipig mandibula.**
  Panel A displays the visualization of a right minipig hemimandible.
  The vasculature at the bone surface is visible.
  The framed area in A marks the subvolume represented in panel B at higher magnification.
  Panel C displays the transverse section marked in panel B, clearly showing the pulp chamber, root canal, and the corresponding vessels.
  Due to the voxel size of 8--9 μm, microvessels with a diameter of 40 μm or less cannot be visualized in such large samples.](images/Fig5_Vreni_jaw_minipig.png){#fig:5}

Angiogenesis influences the osseointegration of implants.
As such, studying angiogenesis and, correspondingly the vascular supply of the peri-implant tissue in detail is important for dental research and many implantology studies.
So far, the only reliable approach to assess the vascular supply remains histology, limited to single two-dimensional sections.

While microCT imaging allows for non-destructive, full 3D imaging of dental research samples with implants, such imaging presents challenges.
This is due to the presence of high-density metal parts with strong X-ray absorption within the samples.
A decalcification step reduces the density of the sample but inevitably leads to the loss of information on the bone microstructure making the simultaneous assessment of the bone and vessels impossible [@doi:10.1038/s41598-017-13632-5].
To distinguish the vasculature from both the metal implants and the mineralized bone tissue, we instilled the vasculature with a suitable contrast agent (μAngiofil).
The X-ray absorption characteristics of μAngiofil make it possible to visualize and differentiate between soft tissue, bone tissue, contrast agent-filled vessels and metal (titanium) implants.
We imaged an μAngiofil-instilled minipig hemimandibula with a SkyScan 2214 (control software version 1.0.0, Bruker microCT N.V., Kontich, Belgium) (Fig. @fig:6), with an X-ray source acceleration voltage of 100 kV and an X-ray source current of 100 μA.
The X-rays were filtered by 1 mm of copper.
Projection images were recorded over a sample rotation of 360°, acquiring one projection every 0.18°, with 4 projections averaged for noise reduction.
Each projection image with a size of 2929 x 1944 pixels had an exposure time of 1080 ms.
This resulted in an isotropic voxel size of 8 μm.

In the resulting tomographic datasets these regions of interest can easily be distinguished based on their gray value ranges, as shown in Fig. @fig:6, Panel C.
Tomographic imaging of such samples and straightforward segmentation of features of interest without cumbersome post-processing (Fig. @fig:6, Panel D) is enabled without requiring a decalcification step.

![**microAngioCT of the peri-implant vasculature of a minipig mandibula.**
  Panel A: Maximum intensity projection image of the minipig mandible dataset with four metal implants and μAngiofil-perfused vessels.
  Panel B: virtual transversal section through the dataset showing an implant within the mandible.
  The colored circles mark structures with different gray value ranges.
  Corresponding peaks with color legend are marked on the histogram in panel C.
  Such differences in gray levels allow a straightforward segmentation of the structures of interest as displayed in the 3D visualization in panel D.](images/Fig6_Segmentation.png){#fig:6}
  
#### Enhancing cntrast dual-energy MicroCT

Unfortunately, not all samples exhibit a pronounced difference in gray values between bone tissue and μAngiofil when scanned using standard scanning parameters.
This issue is particularly common in murine samples, even though the bone mineral density of mouse bones is generally higher than that of other experimental species [@doi:10.1016/j.bone.2011.10.004; @doi:10.1292/jvms.66.599].
As a result, the gray levels of bone tissue and μAngiofil appear similar, making it impossible to distinguish them based on histogram levels alone (e.g., Fig. @fig:4).
While decalcification can improve contrast (see Fig. @fig:2), we propose an alternative, more efficient solution: dual-energy scanning.
Previous studies have demonstrated that microscopic dual-energy CT imaging (microDECT) using commercial lab-based microCT systems can achieve spectral separation of two or more materials with micrometer resolution [@doi:10.1111/jmi.12543; @doi:10.1111/jmi.13369].
Notably, the contrasting properties of hydroxyapatite (the primary mineral in bone and teeth) and iodine (the high-Z component in μAngiofil) make them ideal for spectral X-ray imaging [@doi:10.1111/jmi.12543; @doi:10.1007/s13244-010-0057-0; @doi:10.1118/1.594374].

We evaluated multiple energies (accelerating voltages from 40 to 110 kV) to choose the optimal combination for imaging of the murine mandible perfused with μAngiofil using a SkyScan 2214 (control software version 1.8, Bruker microCT N.V., Kontich, Belgium) (Fig. @fig:7).
The optimal dual-energy settings for the X-ray source were 50 kV/120 µA and 90 kV/100 µA, respectively (acceleration voltage/source current).
Projection images were recorded over a sample rotation of 360°, acquiring one projection every 0.1°, with 7 projections averaged for noise reduction.
Each projection image with a size of 4032 x 2688 pixels had an exposure time of 6000 ms (on average).
This resulted in datasets with an isotropic voxel size of 1.4 μm.

In comparison to 50 kV, at 90 kV the gray value of the bone tissue was decreased and the gray value of μAngiofil increased (Fig. @fig:7 C’).
Such changes allow a non-complicated segmentation of bone and μAngiofil based on the combined histogram (Fig. @fig:7 C’’).

![**Dual-energy microAngioCT of a murine mandibula.**
  Panel A and B represent virtual sections through the microCT datasets obtained at different accelerating voltages: 50 kV (A) and 90 kV (B).
  The dashed red line in panels A and B represents the location of the corresponding intensity profile displayed in panels A’ and B’.
  Panel C highlights the vasculature which is segmented with using the dual-energy approach in red.
  The changes in the intensity profiles of different tissues are shown in graph C’: with the higher voltage (90 kV) the intensity of bone tissue reduces (yellow arrow) and the intensity of vessels (μAngiofil) increases.
  Such changes in gray levels allow segmentation of the vessels using the combined histogram shown in panel C’’ (DEhist, Bruker microCT N.V., Kontich, Belgium).
  Panel D represents a three-dimensional visualization of the segmented tissues (Dragonfly 3D World (2024.1), Comet Technologies Canada Inc., Montréal, Canada).](images/Fig7_DualEnergy.png){#fig:7}
