## Discussion {.page_break_before}

Adequate vascularization is a prerequisite for successful bone formation and regeneration as well as osseointegration of biomaterials [@doi:10.1021/acsabm.1c00979; @doi:10.1089/ten.teb.2020.0132; @doi:10.1242/dev.136861; @doi:10.1002/jbm.a.32411; @doi:10.1042/CS20180155].
Without high-resolution imaging, the interplay between vasculature and bone tissue cannot be adequately studied, making it impossible to control these processes.

Non-destructive microCT imaging is considered the only viable approach for 3D imaging of an intact bone-implant interface [@doi:10.1111/cpr.12578].
To properly distinguish the vasculature from other soft tissue structures, the instillation of a contrast agent or producing a vascular replica is necessary.

Our hereby presented method of imaging the microvasculature within bones based on instillation with μAngiofil overcomes several drawbacks of previously described methods (see [Introduction]).
It is suitable for the visualization of the bone tissue and microvasculature within it with or without decalcification (Fig.
@fig:2).

<!--
ERROR: the paragraph below could not be revised with the AI model due to the following error:

The model `text-davinci-003` has been deprecated, learn more here: https://platform.openai.com/docs/deprecations
-->
The established decalcifying protocols enable correlative imaging of the same sample with preserved intravascular contrast agent with subsequent classical histological evaluation [@doi:10.1038/srep41842].
Such a decalcification step enables tomographic imaging of the murine hind limb vasculature with fewer artifacts around the bone at lower acceleration voltages of the X-ray source due to the reduced radiopacity of the sample.
Such lower acceleration voltages often enable shortened scanning times, leading to a higher sample throughput.
Furthermore, decalcifying the sample enables a threshold-based segmentation of the vasculature and facilitates histological evaluation of the sample, as previously described [@doi:10.1038/srep41842].
However the decalcification step renders bone tissue transparent, disabling simultaneous 3D imaging of the bony and vascular structures.


<!--
ERROR: the paragraph below could not be revised with the AI model due to the following error:

The model `text-davinci-003` has been deprecated, learn more here: https://platform.openai.com/docs/deprecations
-->
In many models, due to the distinct differences in the X-ray attenuation of μAngiofil and the bone tissue, we can forgo the time-consuming decalcification step.
In such cases, we can assess vascularization and bone growth directly in one scan (Fig.
@fig:6).
Unfortunately, it is not always like this (e.g., Fig.
@fig:4).
Although decalcification is a viable option for quite some studies, we believe the dual-energy approach to be a more efficient one (Fig.
@fig:7).
The two scans are done one after the other without removing the sample from the scanner.
This simplifies the registration of the obtained datasets, is much faster than with the decalcification step, provides concurrent imaging of the bone tissue and the sample remains completely intact.
Therefore, the microangioCT approach we present here can be used for the simultaneous visualization of hard and soft tissues and their vascularization in small and large animal models.


<!--
ERROR: the paragraph below could not be revised with the AI model due to the following error:

The model `text-davinci-003` has been deprecated, learn more here: https://platform.openai.com/docs/deprecations
-->
One of the noteworthy possible applications of this approach is the simultaneous visualization of the bone microarchitecture and microvasculature of bone metastases in a murine xenograft tumor model (Fig.
@fig:3).
Especially for studying bone metastatic models, it is crucial to find a method that allows for the correct assessment of the microvasculature without decalcifying the sample.
Such a decalcification would hinder the thorough assessment of pathological processes in bone tissue.
These pathological processes can lead to so-called skeletal-related events, which are associated with shortened survival and deterioration of quality of life [@doi:10.1016/j.jbo.2018.10.004], and should therefore be avoided.
Our method allows to study the response to specific treatments, including bone-targeted and antiangiogenic therapies.
These can be assessed in 3D within the same sample, and be followed up with a histological examination if desired [@doi:10.3390/cancers14143443].
The presented method could offer additional insights into the interplay between angiogenesis and bone growth, bone lysis, and bone turnover, which have not been fully elucidated yet.
The potential findings can be crucial for selecting potential drug candidates, proper treatment decisions and efficacy prediction.


<!--
ERROR: the paragraph below could not be revised with the AI model due to the following error:

The model `text-davinci-003` has been deprecated, learn more here: https://platform.openai.com/docs/deprecations
-->
In dental research, preclinical models can be divided into small and large animals.
Small animal models, particularly mice and rats, are highly popular, due to their practical size and cost-effectiveness.
The microCT scan of correspondingly small samples perfused with μAngiofil can be performed with a voxel size of around 1 μm, providing excellent detail resolution (Fig.
@fig:4).
Murine mandibles and teeth are challenging for assessing the vasculature.
This is due to the location of most of the vessels within the bone canals or in the proximity of the hard tissue.
This consequently leads to the lack of larger bone-free volumes in which the vasculature is easily distinguishable.
Gray value-based segmentation of bone and contrast-agent-instilled vasculature is compounded by the fact that murine bone has a higher mineral bone density when compared to other species [@doi:10.1016/j.bone.2011.10.004; @doi:10.1292/jvms.66.599].
Nonetheless, with the dual energy approach described above we achieved appropriate imaging of such samples and were able to visualize and distinguish vasculature in/from mineralized bone tissue.


<!--
ERROR: the paragraph below could not be revised with the AI model due to the following error:

The model `text-davinci-003` has been deprecated, learn more here: https://platform.openai.com/docs/deprecations
-->
In the small animal model studies without metal or similar biomedical implants, the application of whole mouse clearing and imaging with vDISCO approach could be the method of choice [@doi:10.1038/s41596-022-00788-2].
Another promising improvement to the clearing protocols and immunolabeling of the samples with the bone tissue is the introduction of the collagenase digestion step, which improves the antibody penetration throughout the stained bones and, therefore, the immunostaining [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2022.12.031].
Although newer tissue clearing and immunostaining immersion-based visualization techniques provide very high resolution, three-dimensional, intact images, these methods may produce artifacts such as tissue deformation and illumination inhomogeneity [@doi:10.1016/j.crmeth.2021.100151].


<!--
ERROR: the paragraph below could not be revised with the AI model due to the following error:

The model `text-davinci-003` has been deprecated, learn more here: https://platform.openai.com/docs/deprecations
-->
In the presence of the implanted biomedical devices the situation with the imaging becomes even more challenging.
For murine model studies, a recently published tissue-clearing-based imaging approach [@doi:10.1111/cpr.12578] could be a viable option for the visualization of the peri-implant tissues and vasculature due to the small size of hemimandible samples and availability of transgenic mouse lines.
Though, there are limitations of such a tissue-clearing imaging approach.
Namely; i) differential shrinkage among soft and hard tissues, leading to anisotropic distortion in samples where both tissue types (plus eventual metal implant) are present; ii) limited imaging depth (around 800 μm in a mouse model [@doi:10.1111/cpr.12578]) due to the challenges of achieving complete transparency of bone tissue.
Large anisotropic distortion of the sample may lead to the alteration of the common site of interest, namely the implant-tissue interface.
The limitation of the maximal achievable imaging depth makes such an approach impractical for usage in large animal models.


<!--
ERROR: the paragraph below could not be revised with the AI model due to the following error:

The model `text-davinci-003` has been deprecated, learn more here: https://platform.openai.com/docs/deprecations
-->
Our presented microangioCT approach does not have such limitations and can be easily applied for visualization of hemimandible and its vascularization in a large animal model like Göttingen minipig (Fig.
@fig:5).
μAngiofil has noticeably different attenuation than mineralized bone in most species and allows for distinction, segmentation and visualization of soft tissue, bone tissue, vessels filled with the contrast agent as well as metal implants according to their gray values in the histogram (Fig.
@fig:6).


To the best of our knowledge, ours is the first study demonstrating non-destructive 3D imaging of the microvasculature of bone in the proximity of metal objects/implants in a large animal model.

### Limitations of our approach

<!--
ERROR: the paragraph below could not be revised with the AI model due to the following error:

The model `text-davinci-003` has been deprecated, learn more here: https://platform.openai.com/docs/deprecations
-->
To achieve the excellent results shown in this study it is paramount that the contrast agent instillation is performed in a reproducible and controlled way.
It is thus important that instillation is performed by skilled personnel, with the help of a syringe pump.
Other contrast agents might be slightly easier to use for instillation but fail to give equally high-quality results, as mentioned above.


<!--
ERROR: the paragraph below could not be revised with the AI model due to the following error:

The model `text-davinci-003` has been deprecated, learn more here: https://platform.openai.com/docs/deprecations
-->
Our presented method for the investigation of the microvasculature within the bone tissue is thus mainly limited by the imaging method.
Namely, this is the correlation between achievable resolution and the physical size of the imaged sample.
If the sample is only a few millimeters in diameter, the voxel sizes in the range of 1 μm enable visualization of the microvasculature down to the capillary bed [@doi:10.1016/j.vph.2018.09.003; @doi:10.1007/s00429-020-02158-8; @doi:10.1152/ajprenal.00099.2017; @doi:10.1038/srep41842].
In the case of large samples, like minipig hemimandible, the achievable voxel size is approximately 10 times larger (≥8 μm).
In such samples, the finest microvessels with diameter under 40 μm thus cannot be accurately visualized (see Fig.
@fig:5 & @fig:6).


<!--
ERROR: the paragraph below could not be revised with the AI model due to the following error:

The model `text-davinci-003` has been deprecated, learn more here: https://platform.openai.com/docs/deprecations
-->
Apart from this general limitation of tomographic imaging, the hereby presented approach of instilling the vasculature in the bone tissue with a polymerizing contrast agent is a big step forward for qualitative and quantitative imaging.
The presented method is suitable to answer important questions regarding the microvasculature in tissue engineering and implantology research as well as many other related research fields.

